add tsdb documentation (#7908)
grafana/loki: docs/sources/operations/storage/tsdb.md

---
title: TSDB
---
# TSDB(Time Series Database) Index Store

:warning: TSDB is still an experimental feature. It is not recommended to be used in production environments.

With TSDB index store, you can run Grafana Loki without any dependency on NoSQL stores for storing index.

> Using the TSDB index store, you can run Grafana Loki without any dependency on NoSQL stores for storing indexes. It works the same way as the [boltdb-shipper](./boltdb-shipper) index store, but with reduced total cost of ownership, and better query performance.

Reviewer: Lines 8 and 9 seem to be repeating the same thing?  Maybe a copy/paste error?

Loki uses [Prometheus TSDB format](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/tree/main/tsdb#tsdb) for storing the index with 
some tweaks on top of it for query planning.

## Example Configuration

Example configuration with GCS:

```yaml
schema_config:
  configs:
    - from: 2018-04-15
      store: tsdb
      object_store: gcs
      schema: v12
      index:
        prefix: loki_index_
        period: 24h

storage_config:
  gcs:
    bucket_name: GCS_BUCKET_NAME

  tsdb_shipper:
    active_index_directory: /loki/index
    shared_store: gcs
    cache_location: /loki/tsdb-cache
```

> This would run Loki with TSDB index storing TSDB files locally at `/loki/index` and chunks at configured `GCS_BUCKET_NAME`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration would run Loki with TSDB index storing TSDB files locally at `/loki/index` and chunks at configured `GCS_BUCKET_NAME`.
```

It would also keep shipping TSDB files periodically to the same configured bucket.

> It would also keep downloading TSDB files from shared bucket uploaded by other ingesters to `/loki/tsdb-cache` folder locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would also keep downloading TSDB files from the shared bucket uploaded by other ingesters to the local `/loki/tsdb-cache` folder.
```

## Operational Details

Operationally, TSDB works the same way as BoltDB Shipper except the index format is different.
All the [operational details for BoltDB Shipper](./boltdb-shipper#operational-details) apply to TSDB as well.

> However, there are some additional details to TSDB index store which are mentioned below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are some additional details to the TSDB index store, which are described below.
```

### Dynamic Query Sharding

Previously we would statically shard queries based on the index row shards configured [here](../../configuration/_index#periodconfig).
TSDB does Dynamic Query Sharding based on how much data a query is going to be processing.

> We additionally store size(KB) and number of lines for each chunk in the TSDB index which is then used by [Query Frontend](../../fundamentals/architecture/components#query-frontend) for planning the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We additionally store size(KB) and number of lines for each chunk in the TSDB index which is then used by the [Query Frontend](../../fundamentals/architecture/components#query-frontend) for planning the query.
```

> Based on our learnings from operating a lot of Loki clusters, we have configured TSDB to aim for processing 300-600 MBs of data per query shard.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on our experience from operating many Loki clusters, we have configured TSDB to aim for processing 300-600 MBs of data per query shard.
```

---
title: TSDB
---

> # TSDB Index Store

Reviewer: Same comment as above, spell out TSDB (Note that https://www.acronymfinder.com/ does not yet list Time Series Database for TSDB, so users might struggle with this one if we don't define it for them).

Reviewer: Suggested revision - Time series database index store.

:warning: TSDB is still an experimental feature. It is not recommended to be used in production environments.

With TSDB index store, you can run Grafana Loki without any dependency on NoSQL stores for storing index.

> It works the same way as [boltdb-shipper](./boltdb-shipper) index store, but with reduced TCO and better query performance.

Reviewer: Yes, there are usually multiple possibilities for most acronyms, and it helps not only new users, but non-native English speakers and translators.

> It works the same way as [boltdb-shipper](./boltdb-shipper) index store, but with reduced TCO and better query performance.

Reviewer: Suggested revision - Using the TSDB index store, you can run Grafana Loki without any dependency on NoSQL stores for storing indexes.  It works the same way as the [boltdb-shipper](./boltdb-shipper) index store, but with reduced total cost of ownership,  and better query performance.

> Loki uses [Prometheus TSDB format](https://github.com/prometheus/prometheus/tree/main/tsdb#tsdb) for storing the index with 

Author: I just wanted to put it out there since it establishes the premise that we are using a known and tested index format and indirectly gives the due credit to Prometheus.

some tweaks on top of it for query planning.

## Example Configuration

Example configuration with GCS:

```yaml
schema_config:
  configs:
    - from: 2018-04-15
      store: tsdb
      object_store: gcs
      schema: v12
      index:
        prefix: loki_index_
        period: 24h

storage_config:
  gcs:
    bucket_name: GCS_BUCKET_NAME

  tsdb_shipper:
    active_index_directory: /loki/index
    shared_store: gcs
    cache_location: /loki/tsdb-cache
```

This would run Loki with TSDB index storing TSDB files locally at `/loki/index` and chunks at configured `GCS_BUCKET_NAME`.
It would also keep shipping TSDB files periodically to the same configured bucket.
It would also keep downloading TSDB files from shared bucket uploaded by other ingesters to `/loki/tsdb-cache` folder locally.

## Operational Details

> Operationally, TSDB works the same way as BoltDB Shipper except the index format is different.

Reviewer: Same questions in this file re: proper formatting for the name, is it boltdb-shipper or BoldDB Shipper?

All the [operational details for BoltDB Shipper](./boltdb-shipper#operational-details) apply to TSDB as well.
However, there are some additional details to TSDB index store which are mentioned below.

### Dynamic Query Sharding

> *Note:* Query sharding needs to be enabled using `parallelise_shardable_queries` under [query_range](../../configuration/_index#queryrange)

Reviewer: Passive voice (enabled by who or what?).  Possible revisions:  "You must enable query sharding..."  or  "Your Loki Administrator must enable query sharding...."

Reviewer: Would customers ever want to disable query sharding?  (I don't think they would, since it seems to be a useful feature.)  That's the only reason why I could see documenting how to enable/disable, since it's the default to be enabled.

Author: Query sharding is for speeding up queries by running more and smaller queries. I wanted to call out the flag here because I thought it was disabled by default and not all of the users would know about it and enable the feature. If someone is reading this block and has query sharding disabled, that means they would know how to enable it back.

Reviewer: Were you going to remove this note, since query sharding is enabled by default?

Previously we would statically shard queries based on the index row shards configured [here](../../configuration/_index#periodconfig).
TSDB does Dynamic Query Sharding based on how much data a query is going to be processing.

> We additionally store size(KB) and number of lines for each chunk in the TSDB index which is then used for planning the query.

Reviewer: "... which is then used for planning the query."  Passive voice, used by who or what?  Used by Loki for planning the query?  Can be used by the user for planning the query?

Based on our learnings from operating a lot of Loki clusters, we have configured TSDB to aim for processing 300-600 MBs of data per query shard.

> This means with TSDB we will be running more, smaller queries, so we recommend tuning some configs below.

Reviewer: "... so we recommend tuning some configs below."  Possible revision, "We recommend adjusting the following configurations." or  "We recommend tuning the following configurations."
